OBJECT-ORIENTED PROGRAMMING (OOP)
Class Practical Exercise
Topics Covered: Introduction to OOP, Classes and Objects, Encapsulation, Constructors, Destructors, Getters and Setters, and Member Functions.
Question 1: Classes and Objects (10 Marks)
A university wants to develop a simple system for managing student information.
Write a C++ program that creates a class named Student with the following attributes:
- studentID
- studentName
- course
- age
Tasks:
a) Define the Student class with appropriate data types. (2 marks)
b) Create a parameterized constructor to initialize the student attributes. (2 marks)
c) Create a member function named displayDetails() to display student information. (2 marks)
d) Create three student objects with different details. (3 marks)
e) Call the displayDetails() function for each object. (1 mark)
Question 2: Encapsulation and Information Hiding (10 Marks)
A company wants to develop a system for managing employee salaries.
Create a C++ class named Employee containing:
- employeeID
- employeeName
- salary
Tasks:
a) Declare all attributes as private. (2 marks)
b) Create a constructor to initialize the employee attributes. (2 marks)
c) Implement setSalary() and getSalary() methods. (2 marks)
d) Ensure that the salary cannot be set to a negative value. (2 marks)
e) Create an employee object and demonstrate how the salary can be accessed and modified using getters and setters. (2 marks)
Question 3: Constructors and Destructors (5 Marks)
Create a C++ class named Book with the following attributes:
- bookID
- bookTitle
- author
Tasks:
a) Create a default constructor that initializes the attributes with default values. (1 mark)
b) Create a parameterized constructor that accepts values for all attributes. (2 marks)
c) Create a destructor that displays the message "Book object destroyed". (1 mark)
d) Create two book objects and display their details. (1 mark)
Question 4: OOP Concepts (5 Marks)
Answer the following questions:
a) Differentiate between a class and an object using an example. (1 mark)
b) Explain the difference between a constructor and a setter method. (1 mark)
c) Why is encapsulation important in object-oriented programming? (1 mark)
d) Differentiate between abstraction and information hiding. (1 mark)
e) What is the purpose of a destructor in C++? (1 mark)

Submission Instructions
Students should submit their C++ source code and screenshots showing successful execution of Questions 1, 2 and 3. They should also provide written answers to Question 4.